>> Wooduff: SENTENCED TO DEATH--
A JUDGE ENDS THE TRIAL OF
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV AFTER THE
BOSTON MARATHON BOMBER SPEAKS
PUBLICLY FOR THE FIRST TIME,
APOLOGIZING TO VICTIMS.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY:
>> THLASTE THING WE SHOULD EVER
DO IS ADD TO FAMILY'S PAIN.
>> Ifill: THE WHITE HOUSE CLEARS
THE PATH FOR FAMILIES OF
HOSTAGES TO PAY RANSOM FOR THEIR
RELEASE.
>> Wooduff: THEN, THE MAYOR OF
CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA ON
RACE, GUNS AND A PATH FORWARD
OUT OF TRAGEDY.
>> THIS IS A WORK IN PGRESROS
AND WE WILL NEED TO.
>> ACTUAL THELY FIRST DAY
>> Wooduff: PLUS, A DEATH IN THE
OIL FIELDS.
SAFETY GAPS PUT RIG WORKERS AT
RISK, MAKING DRILLING FOR BLACK
GOLD A DANGEROUS BUSINESS.
>> THAT'S IN THE OIL FIELD.
SAFETY CAUGHT WORKERS AT RISK
MAKING DRILLING FOR BLACK GOLD A
DANGEROUS BUSINESS.
>> TO THEM, THERE'S JUST DOLLAR
SIGNS COMING OUT OF T GROHEUND.
I DON'T THINK THEY HAVE ANY
REGARDS TO HOW THEY'RE GETTING
IT, AND I THINK THEY SHOULD BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE WELL BEING
OF THE PEOPLE WORKING ON THEIR
SITE.
OF Wooduff: THOSE ARE SOME
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Wooduff: THE CONVICTED BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBER-- DZHOKHAR
TSARNAEV-- APOLOGIZED PUBLICLY
TODAY FOR THE FIRST TIME.
THEN, HE WAS SENTENCED TO DIE
FOR THE 2013 ATTACK THAT KILLED
THREE PEOPLE AND WOUNDED MORE
THAN 260.
THE 21-YEAR-OLD TSARNAEV SPOKE
IN FEDERAL COURT AFTER LISTENING
TO STATEMENTS FROM TWO DOZEN
SURVIVORS AND FAMILY MEMBERS.
IN HIS OWN STATEMENT, HE SAID:
WE'LL TALK TO A REPORTER WHO WAS
IN THE COURTROOM, AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
>> Ifill: PUBLIC VIEWING BEGAN
IN SOUTH CAROLINA TODAY FOR THE
REVEREND CLEMENTA PINCKNEY, THE
STATE SENATOR KILLED IN LAST
WEEK'S SHOOTINGS IN CHARLESTON.
THE OPEN COFFIN WAS DISPLAYED
INSIDE THE STATE HOUSE WHERE HE
SERVED FOR NEARLY 20 YEARS.
HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE FILED PAST
DURING THE AFTERNOON.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WILL DELIVER THE
EULOGY AT PINCKNEY'S FUNERAL ON
FRIDAY, IN CHARLESTON
CHARLAYNE HUNTER-GAULT SPEAKS
WITH THE CITY'S LONGTIME MAYOR,
JOSEPH RILEY, LATER IN THE
PROGRAM.
>> Wooduff: MEANWHILE, THE
GOVERNOR OF ALABAMA HAS JOINED
THE PUSH TO RID PUBLIC SPACES OF
CONFEDERATE SYMBOLS.
REPUBLICAN ROBERT BENTLEY
ORDERED SEVERAL FLAGS REMOVED
TODAY FROM THE STATE CAPITOL
GROUNDS.
HE CALLED THEM "A DISTRACTION."
>> Ifill: THE GOVERNMENT OF
FRANCE EXPRESSED OUTRAGE TODAY
AFTER NEW REVELATIONS OF U.S.
EAVESDROPPING.
DOCUMENTS RELEASED BY
"WIKILEAKS" SHOWED THE NATIONAL
LAST THREE FRENCH PRESIDENTS AND
OTHER OFFICIALS, FROM 2006 TO
2012.
PRIME MINISTER MANUEL VALLS,
ADDRESSING THE NATIONAL
ASSEMBLY, SAID FRANCE WILL NOT
TOLERATE SUCH ACTIONS.
>> THIS IS A VERY SERIOUS OF THE
VIOLATION OF THE SPIRIT OF TRUST
WE MUST HAVE.
THE UNITED STATES MUST KNOW THE
DANGERS ON OUR FREEDOMS BUT THEY
MUST DO EVERYTHING TO REPAIR THE
DAMAGES CREATED IN THE RELATION
SURE BETWEEN ALLIED COUNTRIES
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND
FRANCE.
>> Ifill: FRENCH PRESIDENT
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE CALLED THE
SPYING "UNACCEPTABLE", AND SAID
PRESIDENT OBAMA PROMISED-- IN A
PHONE CALL-- TO END IT.
>> Wooduff: IRAN'S SUPREME
LEADER IS TAKING AN EVEN TOUGHER
LINE ON NUCLEAR NEGOTIATIONS--
WITH A DEADLINE JUST DAYS AWAY.
IN TEHRAN LAST NIGHT,YATOLLAH
ALI KHAMENEI REJECTED A FREEZE
ON NUCLEAR RESEARCH, AS WELL AS
ACCESS TO MILITARY SITES.
STATE T.V. ALSO SHOWED KHAMENEI
TELLING SENIOR LEADERS THAT
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS MUST BE
LIFTED IMMEDIATELY.
LIFTED IMMEDIATELY. >> (
translated): THE
AMERICANS
>> (translated): THE
AMERICANS HAVE OFFERED A
COMPLICATED,
HAVE OFFERED A COMPLICATED,
MULTI-LAYERED AND ODD FORMULA
FOR THE LIFTING OF SANCTIONS,
AND IT IS NOT CLEAR HOW IT WOULD
WORK.
LIFTING OF SANCTIONS CANNOT
DEPEND ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF
IRAN'S OBLIGATIONS.
AMERICA'S GOAL IS TO UPROOT AND
DESTROY THE COUNTRY'S NUCLEAR
INDUSTRY.
>> Wooduff: THE U.S. WANTS
SANCTIONS LIFTED GRADUALLY, AND
SAYS INSPECTIONS MUST BE PART OF
ANY AGREEMENT.
>> Ifill: A DUTCH COURT RULED
TODAY THAT THE NETHERLANDS MUST
CUT GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS.
THE CLIMATE RULING ORDERED
REDUCTIONS OF AT LEAST 25% BELOW
1990 LEVELS BY 2020.
ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVISTS SAID THE
CASE LAYS THE LEGAL GROUNDWORK
FOR SIMILAR ACTION IN OTHER
COUNTRIES.
>> Wooduff: IN PAKISTAN, THE
DEATH TOLL FROM BLISTERING HEAT
CLIMBED TO NEARLY 840-- EVEN AS
RAIN AND COOLER BREEZES BROUGHT
RELIEF.
FEWER PEOPLE WERE ADMITTED TO
HOSPITALS IN KARACHI, AFTER A
SPIKE IN HEAT STROKES SINCE
SUNDAY.
MEANWHILE, DISASTER OFFICIALS
CONCEDED THE HEAT CAUGHT THEM
OFF GUARD.
>> THE CLIMATE OF KARACHI IS
TROPICAL.
PEOPLE HAVE NEVER EXPECTED SUCH
SORT OF HEAT WOULD COME AND SO
THEY WERE NOT PREPARED FOR THAT.
SO THAT'S WHY THERE WAS A JUMP,
THERE WAS A SURGE DURING THESE
LAST THREE, FOUR DAYS.
>> Wooduff: THIS WEEK'S
SWELTERING TEMPERATURES WERE
MADE WORSE BY FREQUENT POWER
OUTAGES AND A LACK OF CLEAN
WATER.
>> Ifill: BACK IN THIS COUNTRY,
A 13th CANDIDATE HAS JOINED THE
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL FIELD.
LOUISIANA GOVERNOR BOBBY JINDAL
KICKED OFF HIS CAMPAIGN LATE
TODAY WITH A RALLY JUST OUTSIDE
NEW ORLEANS.
>> MY APPROACH IS DIFFERENT FROM
MOST OF THE OTHER PEOPLE RUNNING
FOR PRESIDENT.
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA WAS
MADE GREAT BY PEOPLE WHO GET
THINGS DONE.
NOT LOTS OF TALK OR ENTER TAKING
SPEECHES.
I WANT TO BE SURE THERE ARE A
LOT OF GREAT TALKERS RUNNING FOR
PRESIDENT ALREADY.
BUT NONE OF THEM, NOT ONE CAN
MATCH OUR RECORD OF ACTUALLY
SHRINKING THE SIZE OF
GOVERNMENT.
>> Ifill: JINDAL IS IN HIS
SECOND TERM AS GOVERNOR, BUT HIS
APPROVAL RATING HAS DROPPED
ARPSHLY IN THE FACE OF A STATE
BUDGET SHORTFALL.
>> Wooduff: WALL STREET HAD A
ROUGH DAY, AMID NEW WORRIES
ABOUT A GREEK BAILOUT DEAL.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST NEARLY 180 POINTS TO CLOSE
BELOW 18,000.
THE NASDAQ FELL ALMOST 40 POINTS
AND THE S&P 500 SLIPPED 15.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
AN APOLOGY AND A DEATH SENTENCE,
SOFTENED HOSTAGE POLICIES THAT
ALLOW U.S. FAMILIES TO PAY
RANSOMS, A TRADE BILL TO EXPAND
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S NEGOTIATING
POWER NEARS PASSAGE, THE MAYOR
OF CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA ON
RACE, GUNS, AND A PATH FORWARD,
WHY NORTH DAKOTA'S OIL FIELDS
ARE AMERICA'S MOST DANGEROUS
PLACE TO WORK, DISTRUST GROWS
BETWEEN THE U.S. AND CHINA AS
ANNUAL TALKS CONVENE, AND A
TIMELINE OF MODERN LIFE IN IRAN
THROUGH ART.
>> Ifill: DURING HIS UNEXPECTED
STATEMENT IN COURT TODAY,
DZOKHAR TSARNAEV-- FOR THE FIRST
TIME-- PUBLICLY ACKNOWLEDGED HIS
ROLE IN THE MARATHON BOMBINGS,
AND SAID HE HAD SINCE LEARNED
THE NAMES AND FACES OF HIS
VICTIMS.
HE ALSO ASKED FORGIVENESS FROM
ALLAH.
AFTER JUDGE GEORGE O'TOOLE
FORMALLY SENTENCED HIM TO DEATH
BY LETHAL INJECTION, SOME
SURVIVORS TOLD REPORTERS THEY
DID NOT CONSIDER HIS APOLOGY
SINCERE.
LYNN JULIAN SUFFERED A TRAUMATIC
BRAIN INJURY AND HEARING LS
AFTER THE BOMBING, AND HENRY
BOGARD STILL STRUGGLES WITH
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.
>> HE THREW IN AN APOLOGY TO THE
SURVIVORS THAT SEEMED INSINCERE
AND JUST THROWN IN BECAUSE HE
WAS SUPPOSED TO.
AND THEN ENDED AGAIN WITH ALLAH
TALKING ABOUT LENIENCY,
IMPLAYING WE SHOULD NOW BE
LENIENT TO HIM.
>> I HAVE FORGIVEN HIM.
I HAVE COME TO A PLACE OF PEACE
AND I GENUINELY HOPE THAT HE
DOES AS WELL.
AND FOR ME TO HEAR HIM SAY THAT
HE'S SORRY, IS THAT IS ENOUGH
FOR ME.
>> Ifill: FOR MORE ON THE DRAMA
IN THE COURTROOM TODAY, WE TURN
TO EMILY ROONEY OF WGBH NEWS,
WHO WAS THERE.
EMILY, IS THAT A STATEMENT FROM
TSARNAEV THE APOLOGY, DID IT
COME AS A SURPRISE.
>> IT DID, GWEN, IT CAME AS A
SURPRISE FROM EVERYBODY.
WE HEARD EARLY THIS MORNING
THERE WAS A POSSIBILITY IT MIGHT
HAPPEN.
BUT IT WASN'T UNTIL HIS DEFENSE
ATTORNEY JUDY CLARK GOT UP
AROUND 1:00 AND SAID THERE'S
GOING TO BE AN AL CUSHING.
WELL AN AL CUSHION COULD BE
ANYBODY ADDRESS THE COURT BUT
WHO IS GOING TO DO ONE ON THE
DEFENSE SIDE AND SURE ENOUGH IT
WAS HIM.
>> Ifill: HE DIDN'T ONLY
ACKNOWLEDGE HIS OWN GUILT BUT
HIS BROTHER'S AND THAT'S NOT OF
HIS DEFENSE OBVIOUSLY.
>> THE STATEMENTS WAS AWKWARD.
IT LOOKED LIKE HE WAS READING
IT.
IT WAS VERY AWKWARDLY PHRASE.
HE SAID IN CASE THERE WAS ANY
LINGERING DOUBT IT WAS ME AND MY
BROTHER WHO DID THIS, WE ARE
GUILTY.
A LOT OF IT WAS POORLY
CONSTRUCTED.
BUT MANY TIMES HE SPOKE ABOUT
THE VICTIMS GETTING TO KNOW
THEM, THEIR NAMES, FACES, AGES.
AT ONE POINT HE SAID I WISH MORE
OF YOU HAD SPOKEN EVEN THOUGH
TODAY 24 PEOPLE GAVE IMPACT
STATEMENTS.
>> Ifill: I WANT TO HEAR
ABOUT THAT BUT I WANT TO ASK YOU
ANOTHER THING.
THE INTERESTING WE NEVER HEARD
HIS VOICE, WE DIDN'T KNOW WHAT
HE SOUNDS LIKE.
WHAT WAS HIS BEARING, WHAT DID
HE SEEM LIKE TO YOU.
>> THAT'S REALLY EGREGIOUS THAT
THE FEDERAL COURTS DON'T HAVE
CAMERAS OR RECORDINGS ALTHOUGH
THERE IS A RECORDING.
MAYBE WE CAN GET AWE HOLD OF IT.
HE SPEAKS IN A THICK RUSSIAN
ACCENT WHICH FRIENDS SAID HE
DOESN'T HAVE AN ACCENT.
HE D IT WAS VERY DISCERNIBLE
RUSSIAN ACCENT.
HE SPOKE VERY SOUTH OF SOFTLY
BUT HE WAS ALSO A FAIR DISTANCE
FROM THE MICROPHONE SO IT WAS
HARD TO HEAR HIM.
I WOULDN'T SAY IT WAS AN
IMPASSIONED APOLOGY IN ANY FORM.
HE'S VERY SOMBER DEMEANOR
ANYWAY.
THAT'S THE WAY HE HELD HIMSELF
IN COURT THE ENTIRE TIME.
WHILE HE DID APOLOGIZE, HE USED
THE WORDS THAT THERE WAS NO
PASSION BEHIND IT.
>> Ifill: SO THE EMOTIONS
FELL TO THE VICTIMS WHO WERE IN
COURT TODAY AND GAVE THOSE
IMPACT STATEMENTS YOU TALKED B
TELL ME ABOUT THOSE.
>> YES.
THAT WAS JUST A WOW, GWEN.
A NUMBER OF THE VICTIMS
ADDRESSED HIM PERSONALLY.
YOU MADE A POOR CHOICE.
YOU ARE DESPICABLE HUMAN BEING.
BUT A NUMBER OF THEM CHOSE NOT
TO ADDRESS HIM.
THEY STOOD TOGETHER, THEY SPOKE
OF HOW HE COULD HAVE HELPED HIS
BROTHER.
HE COULD HAVE BACKED AWAY.
HE COULD HAVE GOTTEN OUT OF THE
PLAN.
INSTEAD HE CHOSE A PATH OF HATE,
DESTRUCTION AND DEATH AND HE
SAYS WE ARE CHOOSING A PATH OF
KINDNESS, LOVE AND FORGIVENESS.
SOME OF THE ONES WHO SPOKE ABOUT
HOW THEIR LIVES HAVE BEEN SO
DRAMATICALLY RUINED REALLY, WITH
POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.
DEAFNESS.
A NUMBER OF PEOPLE SPOKE ABOUT
THE INVISIBLE VICTIMS, THE ONES
WHO LOOKED FINE ON THE OUTSIDE.
YOU CAN SEE THE ONES WALKING
INTO THE COURTROOM WITH MISSING
LIMBS BUT WHO HAD A LOT OF
INTERNAL INJURIES.
ESPECIALLY THE LOSS OF HEARING.
IT WAS VERY EMOTIONAL.
>> Ifill: WAS THERE ANY EYE
CONTACT EVER BETWEEN TSARNAEV
AND ANY OF THESE VICTIMS?
>> HE MADE EYE CONTACT WITH TWO
YOUNG MEN WHO WERE IN THE
DEFENSE BOX.
WE'VE NEVER SEEN THEM BEFORE.
THEY WERE I THINK FRIEND OF HIS
FROM EAT CAMBRIDGE OR UMASS.
BUT HE WAS LOOKING IN THE
DIRECTION OF THE VICTIMS.
TIMES HE DID HIS USUAL THING HE
JUST LOOKED DOWN AND WAS FOOLING
WITH A PENCIL, PULLING ON HIS
BEARD.
CLEARLY HISTORIANS TOLD HIM HE
HAD TO TURN HIS CHAIR TO THE
SIDE SO HE COULD LOOK AT THEM.
HE WAS SORT OF FACING THEM.
SO YES, OCCASIONALLY HE LOOKED
UP, HE SAW WHO WAS SPEAKING.
I WOULDN'T GO SO FAR AS TO SAY
HE MADE EYE CONTACT.
>> Ifill: WE GATHERED THE
PROSECUTOR AS WELL AS SOME OF
THE VICTIMS DIDN'T SEE REMORSETH
HIS STATEMENT TODAY.
>> YOU KNOW, I DON'T KNOW WHAT
ANYBODY WAS EXPECTING.
I THINK IN SOME WAYS THERE WERE
PEOPLE WHO THOUGHT THAT THERE
WAS A SINCERITY TO IT.
HE SAID IT, HE DIDN'T HAVE TO
SAY ANYTHING.
HIS LIFE IS OVER.
HE'S BEEN SENTENCED.
GOING ON SAYING NOTHING WOULD
HAVE BEEN, I THINK IT WOULD HAVE
BEEN DISAPPOINTING, THOUGH.
I THINK PEOPLE WANTED TO HEAR
SOMETHING.
THEY WANTED TO HEAR HIM.
IF THE APOLOGY WASN'T
IMPASSIONED AT LEAST IT WAS
THERE.
>> Ifill: EMILY ROONEY AT
WGBH HAS BEEN COVERING THIS FOR
US.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Wooduff: AFTER COMING UNDER
FIRE OVER THE HANDLING OF
AMERICAN HOSTAGE CASES ABROAD,
PRESIDENT OBAMA TODAY ANNOUNCED
A CHANGE IN POLICY.
>> WE'RE NOT GOING TO ABANDON
YOU, WE WILL STAND BY YOU.
>> Wooduff: THE PRESIDENT'S
PLEDGE TO HOSTAGE FAMILIES
FOLLOWS A SURGE IN DEATHS IN THE
PAST 12 MONTHS.
SIX AMERICANS HAVE DIED IN
CAPTIVITY IN SYRIA, YEMEN AND
PAKISTAN SINCE LAST SUMMER.
THREE OF THEM WERE BEHEADED BY
"ISLAMIC STATE" MILITANTS IN
SYRIA.
SOME OF THE FAMILIES SAY THEY
WERE THREATENED WITH PROSECUTION
IF THEY HAD TRIED TO PAY
RANSOMS, BUT MR. OBAMA PROMISED
TODAY, THAT WILL CHANGE.
>> THE LAST THING THAT WE SHOULD
EVER DO IS TO ADD TO A FAMILY'S
PAIN WITH THREATS LIKE THAT.
>> Wooduff: THE U.S. GOVERNMENT
WILL MAINTAIN ITS POLICY AGAINST
OFFICIAL CONCESSIONS TO TERROR
GROUPS, ALTHOUGH, WASHINGTON DID
NEGOTIATE LAST YEAR'S RELEASE OF
ARMY SERGEANT BOWE BERGDAHL IN
AFGHANISTAN.
HE HAD BEEN HELD FIVE YEARS BY
THE TALIBAN.
AND MANY EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
ROUTINELY PAY RANSOMS FOR
CAPTIVES.
>> THIS IS A HUGE MISTAKE.
>> Wooduff: BUT SOME-- LIKE
DAVEED GARTENSTEIN-ROSS OF THE
FOUNDATION FOR THE DEFENSE OF
DEMOCRACY-- ARGUE THE PRACTICE
ONLY ENCOURAGES HOSTAGE-TAKING.
>> THESE ORGANIZATIONS MAKE
100'S OF MILLION OF DOLLARS FROM
HOSTAGES.
THEY'LL NAB A PERSON, THEY'LL
DEMAND A PAYMENT, AND IT WILL
STRENGTHEN THEIR MILITARY
CAPACITY AND ALLOW THEM TO TAKE
FURTHER HOSTAGES.
THIS IS AN ENORMOUS PROBLEM.
>> Wooduff: BEYOND THE RANSOM
ISSUE, RELATIVES OF BEHEADED
JOURNALIST JAMES FOLEY-- AND
OTHERS-- COMPLAIN OF BEING
STONEWALLED.
LAST YEAR, DIANE FOLEY TOLD
C.N.N.'s ANDERSON COOPER THAT
HER SON'S SAFE RETURN NEVER
SEEMED A PRIORITY FOR THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT.
>> AS AN AMERICAN I WAS
EMBARRASSED AND APPALLED, YOU
KNOW.
I THINK OUR EFFORTS TO GET JIM
FREED WERE AN ANNOYANCE.
>> Wooduff: THE PRESIDENT HEARD
THAT COMPLAINT FIRST-HAND TODAY
IN A MEETING WITH THE RELATIVES.
>> MANY OF THE FAMILIES TOLD US
THAT THEY, AT TIMES, FELT LIKE
AN AFTERTHOUGHT OR A
DISTRACTION.
THAT TOO OFTEN, THE LAW
ENFORCEMENT OR MILITARY AND
INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS THEY WERE
INTERACTING WITH WERE BEGRUDGING
IN GIVING THEM INFORMATION.
AND THAT ENDS TODAY.
>> Wooduff: NOW, MR. OBAMA HAS
ORDERED A SERIES OF CHANGES, TO
INCLUDE: CREATING AN INTER-
GOVERNMENT AGENCY "FUSION CELL"
FOR HOSTAGE RECOVERY, NAMING A
SPECIAL STATE DEPARTMENT ENVOY
TO DEAL WITH FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS
ON HOSTAGE MATTERS, AND
ESTABLISHING AN "ISSUE MANAGER"
IN THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNI TOTY
DECLASSIFY INFORMATION FOR
FAMILY MEMBERS.
THE PRESIDENT ACKNOWLEDGES THE
FAMILIES ARE "RIGHT TO BE
SKEPTICAL", BUT HE'S PROMISING
THERE WILL BE ACCOUNTABILITY.
FOR REACTION TO THE WHITE HOUSE
ANNOUNCEMENT, WE HEAR FROM A
FORMER HOSTAGE.
MICHAEL SCOTT MOORE WAS HELD
FOR NEARLY THREE YEARS BEFORE
IN SOMALIA HIS RELEASE LAST
FALL.
THE GERMAN-AMERICAN SURFING
WRITER WAS KIDNAPPED IN JANUARY
OF 2012 WHILE RESEARCHING A BOOK
ON SOMAL PIRIATES, WITH FUNDING
FROM THE PULITZER CENTER FOR
CRISIS REPORTING.
PIRATE GANGS FINALLY FREED HIM
AFTER HIS FAMILY AND
ORGANIZATIONS FROM THE U.S. AND
GERMANY PAID MORE THAN A
MILLION-AND-A-HALF DOLLARS IN
RANSOM.
OUR CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CORRESPONDENT MARGARET WARNER
SPOKE TO MOORE THIS AFTERNOON IN
WASHINGTON.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL SCOTT
MOORE THANK YOU FOR BEING WITH
US.
HOW WOULD THE POLICY CHANGES
THAT THE PRESIDENT ANNOUNCED
TODAY HAVE CHANGED THE ORDEAL
THAT YOU AND YOUR FAMILY AND THE
OTHER FAMILIES, MANY OF WHOM YOU
KNOW WENT THROUGH?
>> WELL, I'M NOT SURE IT WOULD
HAVE CHANGED MY ORDEAL SO MUCH,
BUT IT WOULD HAVE CHANGED THE
ORDEAL OF SOME OF THE FAMILIES
WHO HAVE HOSTAGES IN SYRIA.
MY CASE WAS A CRIMINAL CASE.
THEY WEREN'T TERRORISTS OR
PIRATES THAT WERE TOLDING ME.
SO I THINK INFORMATION FLOWED TO
MY FAMILY A LITTLE MORE EASILY
THAN IT DID TO THE FAMILIES INS.
WITH PEOPLE IN SYRIA.
AND THE REVIEW THAT WAS LAID OUT
TODAY AND THIS MORNING FOR US
SEEMS TO RELEASE A LITTLE BIT
MORE CLASSIFIED INFORMATION TO
FAMILIES IN THOSE CASES, IN
THOSE INSTANCES.
AND THAT'S GOOD.
>> Reporter: HOW IMPORTANT IS
IT TO THOSE FAMILIES THAT THERE
WILL NO LONGER BE ANY THREATS,
THAT THEY COULD BE PROSECUTED IF
THEY WERE TO PAY PRIVATE RANSOM.
>> WELL THAT'S HUGE, BUT IT'S A
LITTLE BIT COSMETIC.
SOMEHOW WORD GOT AROUND IN THE
OFFICIAL CIRCLES THAT PEOPLE
WITH HOSTAGE RELATIVES IN SYRIA,
ISIS IN PARTICULAR, WERE GOING
TO BE SUBJECT TO MATERIAL
SUPPORT LOSS.
>> Reporter: PROVIDING
MATERIAL TO SUPPORT THE
TERRORISTS.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THAT'S STILL ILLEGAL.
BUT I THINK THE IDEA THE
GOVERNMENT'S TRYING TO GET
ACROSS NOW IS PROSECUTION WAS
NEVER ON THE TABLE.
>> Reporter: HOW, THE
ADMINISTRATION IS MAKING CLEAR
THAT NOTHING IS CHANGING ABOUT
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT POLICY, BUT
IT WON'T NEGOTIATE AND IT WON'T
PAY RANSOM BECAUSE IT WANTS TO
DISCOURAGE HOSTAGE TAKING OF
AMERICANS.
BASED ON YOUR OWN EXPERIENCE,
DOES IT HAVE THAT EFFECT.
>> NO.
MOST OF THE PEOPLE I WAS
SURROUNDED BY IN SOMALIA HAD NO
CLUE ABOUT DIFFERENCES IN
HOSTAGE POLICY BETWEEN FRANCE
AND BRITAIN, THE UNITED STATES,
GERMANY, WHATEVER.
>> Reporter: SO THEY WERE
DEMANDING $20 MILLION FOR YOU.
AND WHAT, THEY HAD NO IDEA, THEY
THOUGHT WHAT, THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT WAS GOING TO PAY
THAT?
>> YES.
THEY EXPECTED MONEY FROM THE
U.S. GOVERNMENT, FROM THE GERMAN
GOVERNMENT, THERE MY FAMILY AND
WHEREVER ELSE THEY COULD FIND
MONEY, YES.
>> Reporr: TELL US A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT YOUR ORDEAL.
I MEAN, WHAT WAS THE WORST, THE
ASPECT OF IT OR THE MOMENT OF
IT.
>> I WAS HELD FOR TWO AND-A-HALF
YEARS ALTOGETHER BUT FOR ALMOST
TWO OF IT, I WAS ALONE WITH NO
ONE ELSE TO TALK TO BESIDES THE
GUARDS.
I THINK THE DURATION OF THAT WAS
THE WORST PART.
THERE WERE OTHER HORRIBLE
MOMENTS BUT I THINK THAT WAS THE
WORST.
>> Reporter: HOW DID YOU
COPE?
>> I COPED BY REVISING BOOKS IN
MY HEAD.
I HAD A COUPLE BOOKS THAT I KNEW
NEEDED SOME REVISION.
>> Reporter: BOOKS YOU'D
WRITTEN.
>> BOOKS I'D WRITTEN, ALMOST
FINISHED BEFORE I WENT TO
SOMALIA.
AND I SAT THERE AND THOUGHT WELL
THEY NEED TO BE CHANGED.
I ACTUALLY REHEARSED WHOLE
PARAGRAPHS AND PASSAGES IN MY
HEAD.
AND THAT HELPED.
YOGINANDA HELPED.
THEY SOMETIMES TRIED TO DO YOGA
TOO SO I WOUND UP TEACHING THEM.
>> Reporter: WHAT ABOUT THE
SENSE OF DESPAIR, DID YOU
DESPAIR.
>> YES.
BY 2014, AFTER ABOUT TWO YEARS,
I THINK I GAVE UP HOPE TH I
WAS GOING TO GET OUT.
IT JUST SEEMED LIKE THERE WAS A
DEAD:00 ANDEADLOCK AND THAT'S WI
EITHER KILLING MYSELF OR KILLING
THE GUARDS AROUND ME.
>> Reporter: NOW YOU WRITE
THAT YOU DID HOPE TO BE RESCUED.
IS THAT WHAT YOU WANTED DESPITE
THE RISK.
OFTEN HOSTAGES ARE KILLED IN
RESCUE.
>> SURE.
AFTER A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF TIME
YOU GIVE UP THINKING ABOUT THE
RISKS AND YOU JUST WANT OUT, YOU
KNOW.
THAT'S A NORMAL PART OF HOSTAGE
PSYCHOLOGY.
>> Reporter: WHAT WAS YOUR
MOTHER DOING IN THE MEANTIME TO
TRY TO BRING YOUR RELIEF.
>> TRYING TO NEGOTIATE WITH THE
GANG.
>> Reporter: DIRECTLY?
>> DIRECTLY.
>> Reporter: ON THE PHONE?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: WHAT SORT OF
SUPPORT DID SHE GET FROM THE
GOVERNMENT.
>> SHE HAD CLOSE QUARTERS ADVICE
FROM THE FBI.
>> Reporter: NO THREATS TO
HER ABOUT DON'T PAY RANSOM.
>> NO, NOT FROM THE GOVERNMENT.
NOT DIRECTLY.
THERE ARE A COUPLE MOMENTS WHERE
IT SEEMED LIKE THE STATE
DEPARTMENT WAS TRYING TO SORT OF
GET IN THE WAY.
BUT NOT A PHONE CALL TO HER.
THAT SEEMED TO HAPPEN MAINLY IN
THE CASES OF THE FAMILIES THAT
HAD HOSTAGES IN SYRIA.
>> Reporter: NOW, YOU HAVE
WRITTEN THAT IF THE U.S. ISN'T
GOING TO PAY RANSOM, THEN THE
U.S. STILL HAS A MORAL
OBLIGATION TO DO SOMETHING ELSE.
>> IF WE THINK THAT AMERICAN
POLICY IS GOING TO STOP FUTURE
KIDNAPPINGS, THEN WE'RE MISLED
BY THE IDEA THAT JUST SAYING TO
A TV CAMERA THAT WE DON'T PAY
RANSOM, WILL ACTUALLY PREVENT
IT.
BECAUSE THERE WASN'T A CASE IN
MY CASE.
THE ONE LANGUAGE THAT KIDNAPPERS
AND TERRORISTS WOULD UNDERSTAND
IS THE CONSISTENT POLICY OF
RESCUE.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO YOU MEAN
A CONSISTENT POLICY OF RESCUE.
HOW THEY WILL UNDERSTAND THIS.
>> THOSE WHO WERE BOTH RESCUED
HOURS AFTER I WAS CAPTURED.
IF I HAD THEN BEEN RESCUED A
COUPLE MONTHS LATER OR WHATEVER
AND OTHER HOSTAGES ALSO HAS BEEN
RESCUED AROUND THE WORLD, I
THINK WORD WOULD GET AROUND A
LOT MORE QUICKLY THAT THE U.S.
HAS NO TOLERANCE FOR THIS KIND
OF THING.
BUT I THINK IF HOSTAGE TAKERS
AND THE GUARDS, IN PARTICULAR,
WERE LOSING THEIR LIVES ON A
CONSISTENT BASIS WHENEVER THEY
CATCH HOSTAGES, THAT WOULD GET
THE WORD OUT A LOT MORE QUICKLY.
BUT THAT'S DIFFERENT FROM SAYING
THAT I THINK THAT EVERY HOSTAGE
CASE SHOULD BE RESOLVED BY I3
VIOLENT RESCUE.
I THINK FAMILIES SHOULD HAVE
INPUT ON THAT.
I THINK THAT SHOULD BE AN
IMPORTANT ELEMENT OF ON NEW
POLICY.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL SCOTT
MOORE, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AFTER WEEKS OF
NEGOTIATION, THE SENATE VOTED
TODAY TO APPROVE ONE OF THE
PRESIDENT'S TOP PRIORITIES:
PERMISSION TO PAVE A SPEEDY PATH
TOWARD AN INTERNATIONAL TRADE
DEAL.
THE FAST-TRACKED TRADE PROMOTION
AUTHORITY WOULD: REQUIRE THE
FULL TEXT OF ANY TRADE DEAL TO
BE MADE PUBLIC, GIVE CONGRESS UP
TO 90 DAYS TO VOTE UP OR DOWN,
AND BAN CONGRESS FROM AMENDING
THE TRADE DEAL.
IT WAS A BIG TURNAROUND ON
CAPITOL HILL, AND A BIG VICTORY
FOR THE WHITE HOUSE.
POLITICAL DIRECTOR, LISA
DESJARDINS JOINS ME NOW TO
EXPLAIN HOW IT HAPPENED.
>> THIS IS LITERALLY THE PHOENIX
FROM THE ASHES.
>> THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT WHEN ALL
OF THIS BLEW UP IN THE HOUSE AND
THE SENATE TOOK IT ON.
THIS IS WHAT HAPPENED GWEN.
CHANGE IN STRATEGY.
LAST WEEK THOSE WHO SUPPORTED
THIS IDEA PUT TOGETHER SOMETHING
REPUBLICANS LIKE WITH SOMETHING
DEMOCRATS LIKE WHICH IS
ASSISTANCE TO WORKERS WHO LOSE
THEIR JOBS.
COUPLE THEM TOGETHER.
DEMOCRATS REALIZE THERE WAS A
FLAW THERE.
THEY VOTED AGAINST ONE PART.
NOW DO OVER AND INSTEAD THEY
THOUGHT PEOPLE WOULD SUPPORT
THIS.
THE PRESIDENT HAS TAKEN THESE
TWO ISSUES SEPARATELY AND
TODAY'S VOTE WAS ON FAST TRACK
AUTHORITY.
ONLY IT HAD THE VOTES LAST WEEK,
IT HAD A COUPLE VOTES THIS WEEK
BUT IT HAS MADE FINAL PASSAGE.
>> IT'S LINKED TO SOMETHING ELSE
THAT MEMBERS WANTED.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
WHAT THEY'VE DONE HERE IS
THEY'VE ADDED TO THAT SECOND
PIECE WHICH THEY SEPARATED.
THE WORKER ASSISTANCE.
THEY PLACED THAT INSIDE OF THE
AFRICAN TRADE DEAL THAT IS VERY
POPULAR WITH GUESS WHO, THE
BLACK CAUCUS DEMOCRATS IN THE
HOUSE.
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO VOTE
AGAINST THAT.
AND THEY ALSO ADDED ONE OTHER
THING.
SOME PROVISIONS THAT THE STEEL
INDUSTRY LIKES SO IT HELPS THEM
IN INTERNATIONAL COMPETITION.
THAT'S ANOTHER DEMOCRATS THAT
CANNOT VOTE AGAINST THAT.
SO DEMOCRAT STROOJ LAST WEEK NO
LONGER IN PLAY BECAUSE THERE'S
TWO MORE IN THE POT THEY
SUPPORT.
>> Ifill: LET'S BE CLEAR FOR
VIEWERS 678 WHAT PASSED THE
SENATE TODAY WAS THE FAST TRACK
DEAL.
BUT WHAT STILL NOW HAS TO PASS
THE HOUSE IS THIS ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT.
WE SAW NANCY PELOSI TODAY CHANGE
HER MIND AND BRING ALONG
LEADERSHIP TO SUPPORT THE
PRESIDENT FINALLY.
>> JUST FOR THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN
WATCHING TODAY THE SENATE PASSED
BOTH TRADE PROMOTION AUTHORITY
AND THE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
SEPARATELY.
THE FIRST ONE HAD ALREADY PASSED
THE HOUSE, GOES TO THE PRESIDENT
FAST TRACK.
BUT THE OTHER ONE, THAT'S THE
ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
THAT GOES BACTO K THE HOUSE AND
YOU'RE RIGHT THE BIG STORY IS
NANCY PELOSI.
LAST WEEK SHE TOOK A STAND
AGAINST IT TRYING TO BRING DOWN
A WHOLE BUNDLE OF THINGS.
NOW HER OFFICE TELLS ME BECAUSE
THEY'RE SEPARATED, SHE WANTS TO
HELP THESE WORKERS AND SHE DID
IN FACT SAY SHE'S SUPPORTING
THIS WHEN IT GETS TO THE HOUSE A
VOTE WE EXPECT TOMORROW.
>> Ifill: WE TALK ABOUT FAST
TRACK.
THIS IS ALL OF A SUDDEN MOVING
ALONG VERY QUICKLY.
>> THIS IS ALMOST IN THE BLINK
OF AN EYE THE WHAT IS TWO DAYS
HAS COMPLETELY TURNED AROUND.
THOSE VERY NERVOUS ABOUT THE
OPENING END HERE WHICH WAS THE
TRANSPACIFIC PARTNERSHIP THAT
GIANT TRADE DEAL WITH THE
PACIFIC RIM, THEY'RE WORRIED THE
FAST TRACK KIND OF MAKES THAT
TPP DEAL OR TRANSPACIFIC
PARTNERSHIP MUCH MORE LIKELY.
GWEN THAT'S NOT ALL THAT'S AT
STAKE.
ALSO COMING DOWN THE PIKE IS A
BIG TRADE DEAL.
I TALKED TO THE SENATOR
YESTERDAY.
THE PICK DEAL, THE EUROPEAN DEAL
60% OF THE WORLD'S GDP AND HE
SAID TO ME GWEN THIS COULD BE
THE LAST BIG TRADE DEAL IN A
GENERATION.
>> Ifill: THERE'S ALWAYS
PRESIDENTIAL POLITICS INVOLVED
IN THESE THINGS BUT THERE WAS
ONE PARTICULAR VOTE THAT TURNED
AROUND]/> YESTERDAY, TODAY, WHII
FOUND INTERESTING.
THAT'S TED CRUZ, THE SENATOR
FROM TEXAS WHO RECENTLY SAID
THIS IS A GREAT DEAL FOR
AMERICA, THIS TRADE DEAL.
BUT NOW NOT SO MUCH.
>> VOTED FOR.
IN FACT VOTED OP ED IN FAVOR OF
THE DEAL AND THIS WEEK VIDEOED
AGAINST -- VIDEOED AGAINS VOTED.
HE SAID THE CIRCUMSTANCES HAS
CHANGED.
THE CIRCUMSTANCES HAVEN'T
CHANGED BUT THE ANALYSIS HAS.
HE LOOKED AT IT AND HE SAID THIS
GIVES THE PRESIDENT TOO MUCH
AUTHORITY.
HE SAID HE WANTED TO VOTE
AGAINST THE ARRAY THAT HOUSE
REPUBLICANS ARE BASICALLY BEAT
REPUBLICANS TO THE VOTING.
I DON'T KNOW.
IT SALES LIKE MAYBE THE POLITICS
CHANGED HERE AS WELL.
>> Ifill: CHANGED FOR THE
HOUSE AND FOR THE DEMOCRATS IN
THE HOUSE AND AT LEAST ONE
REPUBLICAN IN THE SENATE AS
WELL.
LISA DESJARDINS, ALWAYS A
PLEASURE.
>> Wooduff: TONIGHT WE CONTINUE
OUR SERIES WE'RE CALLING "RACE
TODAY."
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT CHARLAYNE
HUNTER-GAULT, FORMERLY A FULL-
TIME MEMBER OF THE NEWSHOUR
FAMILY, RETURNS WITH
A CONVERSATION WITH CHARLESTON
MAYOR JOSEPH RILEY.
ELECTED IN 1975, HE'S ONE OF THE
NATION'S LONGEST SERVING MAYORS,
HOLDING OFFICE FOR TEN TERMS AS
A DEMOCRAT.
HE SAT DOWN WITH CHARLAYNE TODAY
IN HIS OFFICE AT CHARLESTON CITY
HALL.
>> Reporter: THERE MAYOR,
THANK YOU FOR JOINING ME.
HORRIFIC CRIME THAT TOOK PLACE
IN YOUR CITY HAS THE COUNTRY
ONCE AGAIN FOCUSED INTENSELY ON
RACE AND RACISM.
NOW, IN THE 40 YEARS THAT YOU'VE
BEEN MAYOR, I HEAR PRAISE FROM
ALL AROUND FOR YOU.
CAN YOU TELL ME WHAT IS THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING YOU'VE LEARNED
DURING THAT TIME ABOUT RACISM
AND HOW TOO DEAL WITH IT.
>> TO DEAL WITH IT HONESTLY, NOT
POLITICALLY JUST HONESTLY, WE
WORK HARD TO PRODUCE POSITIVE
RACE RELATIONS.
MOST WHITE PEOPLE BACK THEN HAVE
HAD NO PROFESSIONAL RELATIONSHIP
WITH AN AFRICAN AMERICAN.
ONLY SMALL PERCENTAGE HAVE GONE
TO SCHOOL IN THE PUBLIC
ACCOMMODATION.
SO THERE'S A PROCESS OF GETTING
TO KNOW EACH OTHER AND GETTING
PEOPLE COMFORTABLE WITH KNOWING
EACH OTHER.
AFRICAN AMERICANS, SO IT WAS
JUST CONTINUING TO PUSH.
IN THE NORTH, PEOPLE ARE ENGAGED
TO COMMUNICATE AND BECOME
FRIENDS AND THEN IN THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN NEIGHBORHOODS, IT WAS
VERY IMPORTANT THAT THEY KNEW
THAT THIS GOVERNMENT WAS THEIR
VERNMENT.
>> Reporter: SO YOU WENT
THERE TO CONVINCE THEM OF THAT.
>> I NOT ONLY WENT TO CONVINCE
THEM, WE ACTED.
PEOPLE CALL ME BEHIND MY BACK
L.BJ A LITTLE BLACK JOKE BECAUSE
ALL I WAS INTERESTED IN WAS
BLACK PEOPLE.
WHAT I KNEW FOR THIS TO BE A
GREAT CITY IT HAD TO BE A JUST
CITY AND WE HAD TO BEGIN WITH
CITIZENS WHO HAVE NOT BEEN A
PART OF THE GOVERNMENTS BEFORE
SO RATHER IT'S AFFORDABLE
HOUSING FOR NEIGHBORHOODS,
PUBLIC PLACES, GETTING THE
POLICE IN THE NEIGHBORHOODS.
OUR POLICE SEPARATE SUMMER CAMP
WITH KIDS.
THE KIDS HUG THEM AFTER CAMP.
IT'S A SMALL CITY SO THAT EVERY
NEIGHBORHOOD IS CONNECTED.
SO THEY BEGAN TO REALIZE THIS
WAS THEIR GOVERNMENT AND WE ARE
AFFIRMATIVELY ACTIVE TO DO THAT.
>> Reporter: ALL ACCOUNTS
PERFORMED ADMIRABLY.
AND EVEN LAST NIGHT WHEN THERE
WERE DEMONSTRATORS OUT THERE IN
A DIFFERENT MODE AND MOVED FROM
THE PEOPLE IN THE CHURCH SUNDAY
WHO SAID THEY FORGAVE.
THEY HAVE SHOUTED NO JUSTICE, NO
PEACE AND I'M TOLD THAT THE
POLICE ESCORTED THEM IN A MOST
EFFICIENT WAY.
NOW HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN THAT AND
WHAT DO YOU SHARE WITH OTHER
POLICE CHIEFS AND PLAYERS AND
OTHERS AROUN --MAYORS AND OTHERE
COUNTRY TO GET THAT TO HAPPEN.
>> I THINK WE HAVE THE BEST
POLICE DEPARTMENT IN AMERICA.
WE KNOW THAT THEIR GOAL IS TO
SERVE THE CITIZENS OF OUR
COMMUNITY TO MAKE THEM SAFE,
THEY'LL DO IT WITH NOT JUST WITH
JUSTICE BUT WITH KINDNESS AND
YOU KNOW, AND GOOD
COMMUNICATION.
WE TREAT EVERYBODY NICELY AND
THE BAD PEOPLE, WE ARREST THEM
AND ALL OF THAT.
BUT THE POLICE THERE IS FRIENDS
WITH THE COMMUNITY.
AND THEY KNOW AND THEY'RE WELL
TRAINED TO BE RESPECTFUL AND
COURTEOUS.
>> Reporter: HOW ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENS HERE FROM WHAT HAPPENS
JUST A FEW MILES AWAY WHEN A
POLICEMAN SHOT AN UNARMED BLACK
MAN WHO WAS RUNNING AWAY IN THE
BACK.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE?
>> WELL, OUR POLICE CHIEF AND
OUR POLICE OFFICERS ARE HIGHLY
TRAINED.
>> Reporter: IS THAT THE KEY?
>> I THINK IT IS.
>> Reporter: BUT YOU SET A
TONE.
YOU HAVE TO ALSO SET A TONE.
>> YOU SET A TONE.
AND THEY WORK VERY HARD.
>> Reporter: HOW DIFFERENT IS
WHAT IS GOING ON IN HERE THAN IN
THE REST OF THE COUNTRY IN AS
FAR AS RACISM?
>> WELL YOU KNOW THE KILLER IS
NOT FROM CHARLESTON, IT'S 110
MILES AWAY.
>> Reporter: HE WAS A
SOUTHERNER.
>> HE WAS A SOUTHERNER.
AND IT SHOWS THAT THERE ARE
THESE POCKETS OF EVIL AND RACIAL
HATRED THAT WE HAVE TO PUT UNDER
A SPOTLIGHT.
THEY HAVE TO BE IN SUNLIGHT.
WE HAVE TO FIND WAYS TO KNOW.
YOU GOT THE FIRST COMMANDMENT,
YOU CAN SAY BAD THINGS AND
BELIEVE BAD THINGS IF YOU WANT
TO.
BUT WE'VE GOT TO WORK AS A
COUNTRY TO FIND OUT WHERE THESE
SALES OF HATE ARE AND BRING THEM
INTO PUBLIC CONSCIOUSNESS
BECAUSE IF SOMEBODY IS HATEFUL
AND BELIEVES ALL OF THIS KIND OF
STUFF AND WORKING VIA THE
INTERNET AND SPREADING ALL THIS,
IT'S GOOD IF WE FIND OUT WHO IT
IS, WE CAN AT LEAST EXPOSE THAT.
SO THEY KNOW, AND ALL OF A
SUDDEN THAT OPERATOR IS IN
DARKNESS BUT WE HAVE, WE ARE
STILL A WORK IN PROGRESS IN
AMERICA.
>> Reporter: BUT HOW DO YOU
REACH PEOPLE WHO DON'T THINK
THAT RACISM IS THEIR PROBLEM?
AND THERE ARE A LOT OF THEM.
>> YEAH.
WELL, THIS TRAGIC EVENT SHOULD
REACH MOST E
RACISTS IF RACISM WAS A PROBLEM.
I THINK IT IS TO MANY AMERICANS
IS SHOCKING.
AND I TINKH IT SHOWS THAT THERE
IS WORK TO DO IN OUR COUNTRY.
NOT IN THE SOUTH BUT IN OUR
COUNTRY.
WE HAVE MORE WORK TO DO, TO
UNDERSTAND EACH OTHER.
RESPECT EACH OTHER'S
DIFFERENCES, EMBRACE EACH OTHER.
WE'VE MADE HUGE PROGRESS
CONSIDERING WHERE WE WERE.
IN MY LIFETIME IN THE 72 YEARS
I'VE BEEN ALIVE.
BUT IT SHOWS THAT THIS IS A WORK
IN PROGRESS AND WE NEED TO PUT
OUR SHOULDERS TO THE WHEEL AND
KEEP MOVING IT FORWARD.
>> Reporter: MR. MAYOR, THANK
YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: AN "OIL RUSH" IS ON IN
NORTH DAKOTA, WHERE PRODUCTION
HAS RISEN 12-FOLD SINCE 2000.
BUT ALONG THE WAY, THE BUSINESS
HAS ALSO BECOME DANGEROUS.
AT LEAST 74 PEOPLE HAVE DIED IN
THE BAKKEN OIL FIELDS SINCE
2006.
AND MAJOR OIL COMPANIES-- WHICH
HAVE MOST PROFITED FROM THE
BOOM-- OFTEN EVADE
ACCOUNTABILITY WHEN ACCIDENTS
HAPPEN.
REPORTER JENNIFER GOLLAN FROM
"REVEAL"-- A PODCAST AND PUBLIC
RADIO PROGRAM-- LOOKS INTO WHY
LIFE IN THE OIL FIELDS HAS
BECOME SO RISKY.
>> Reporter: WHEN BRENDAN WEGNER
LEFT WISCONSIN FOR THE BAKKEN
OIL FIELDS, HIS PARENTS HAD NO
IDEA NORTH DAKOTA WAS THE
DEADLIEST PLACE TO WORK IN
AMERICA.
>> I WAS HAPPY FOR HIM.
I DIDN'T KNOW OIL RIGS WERE
DANGEROUS.
>> Reporter: BRENDAN WAS HIRED
TO WORK FOR A SMALL OIL SERVICE
COMPANY.
>> THE GUY TOLD HIM, YOU PUT
YOUR TIME IN HERE AND IN A YEAR,
YEAR-AND-A-HALF YOU'LL BE UP
OVER $100,000 A YEAR.
FOR A 21 YEAR OLD KID, THAT'S
PRETTY EXCITING.
>> Reporter: BRENDAN GOT THE JOB
BECAUSE HE WORKED AS AN
ELECTRICAL LINEMAN AND WAS GOOD
WITH HEIGHTS.
>> IF YOU'VE EVER SEEN A
WORKOVER RIG, THERE'S STACKS OF
PIPES IN THERE.
HIS JOB WOULD BE TO STAND UP
THERE AND UNCOUPLE THEM OR
COUPLE THEM TOGETHER.
AND THE DAY OF THE ACCIDENT WAS
ACTUALLY HIS FIRST DAY WORKING
ON THE RIG.
OIL SHOT 50 FEET IN THE AIR.
Narr: A BLOWOUT.
BRENDAN WAS TRAPPED.
THE WELL'S OPERATOR HAD INJECTED
SALT WATER TO MAKE THE WELL SAFE
TO WORK ON.
EVEN SO, THE WELL EXPLODED.
>> YEAH, THAT LOOKS LIKE THE RIG
SITE TO ME.
>> Reporter: JEBADIAH STANFILL
WAS WORKING ON A NEARBY RIG AND
RUSHED OVER.
>> I GO OUT THERE AND ASKED HIM
WHERE EVERYBODY'S AT AND HOW
MANY ARE THERE?
HE JUST SAYS, "DERRICK MAN'S
DEAD.
THE RRICDEK MAN'S DEAD."
THAT'S WHEN I LOOKED UP AND SAW
WHAT I LATER FIND OUT IS BRENDAN
BURNING IN THE DERRICK.
>> Reporter: WITHIN HOURS, THE
RIG WAS A TWISTED HULK OF
SMOKING STEEL, PINNING BRENDAN'S
BODY UNDER THE COLLAPSED WRECK.
ONE OTHER WORKER DIED.
ANOTHER LOST HIS LEGS AND LATER
COMMITTED SUICIDE.
IT WAS THE DEADLIEST ACCIDENT IN
THE BAKKEN IN THE LAST DECADE.
OSHA, THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY
AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION,
LAUNCHED AN INVESTIGATION THAT
MAINLY FOCUSED ON THE MISSING
SAFETY EQUIPMENT.
ERIC BROOKS IS THE DIRECTOR OF
OSHA'S BISMARCK AREA OFFICE.
>> IN THIS PARTICULAR INSTANCE,
YOU HAD AN EMPLOYEE THAT WAS UP
ON THE MAST.
AND SO NOW YOU HAVE A FIRE AND
EXPLOSION.
HE DOESN'T HAVE ANYWHERE TO GO
BECAUSE YOUR EMERGENCY EGRESS
LINE WASN'T INSTALLED.
SO HIS ONLY AVENUE WOULD EITHER
HAVE BEEN TO JUMP OR TRY TO
CLIMB DOWN INTO THE FLAMES.
>> Reporter: WHO'S TO BLAME FOR
THIS ACCIDENT?
>> FIRST AND FOREMOST, WE TALK
ABOUT WHAT WE CALL THE EXPOSING
EMPLOYER, YOU KNOW, "I WORK FOR
YOU" THAT RELATIONSHIP.
AND THAT'S WHERE THE R
ACCOUNTABILITY HOLDS IS WITH
THAT EXPOSING EMPLOYER.
>> Reporter: THE PROBLEM IS THE
EXPOSING EMPLOYER AND THE
OPERATOR OF THE WELL ARE
SEPARATE COMPANIES, WHICH
SHIELDS ENERGY PRODUCERS FROM
ACCOUNTABILITY.
THERE ARE MANY LAYERS OF
CONTRACTORS IN THE OIL FIELDS.
IN THIS CASE, BRENDAN WAS HIRED
BY CARLSON WELL SERVICE WHO IN
TURN WAS WORKING FOR OASIS
PETROLEUM NORTH AMERICA--
THEY'RE PART OF OASIS PETROLEUM,
BASED IN HOUSTON.
A KEY WAY ENERGY COMPANIES LIKE
OASIS FURTHER INSULATE
THEMSELVES IS TO HIRE WHAT ARE
KNOWN AS COMPANY MEN.
THEY'RE SITE SUPERVISORS-- BUT
THEY'RE MOSTLY INDEPENDENT
CONTRACTORS-- OUTSIDE OF OSHA'S
PURVIEW.
>> COMPANY MEN ARE ESSENTIALLY
THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OIL
COMPANIES THEMSELVES.
BUT ULTIMATELY, THEY ARE THE
ONES IN CHARGE ON THE SITES.
>> Reporter: A SHERIFF'S DEPUTY
INTERVIEWED OASIS' COMPANY MAN
LOREN BALTRUSCH HOURS AFTER THE
ACCIDENT.
>> AND WHAT'S YOUR ROLE ON THE
WORKOVER RIG?
>> KINDA SUPERVISING.
>> BUT THE MEN DO THE MAJORITY
OF THE WORK?
>> YEAH.
>> OKAY.
>> Reporter: BY USING
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS TO
OVERSEE THEIR WELLS, ENERGY
COMPANIES LIKE OASIS CAN AVOID
PENALTIES WHEN THINGS GO AWRY.
OASIS MISJUDGED THE PRESSURE IN
THE WELL-- THE ROOT CAUSE OF THE
ACCIDENT-- SAYS THE LAWYER FOR
BRENDAN'S PARENTS, JUSTIN
WILLIAMS.
>> ALL THE DECISIONS AND ALL THE
INFORMATION WITH REGARD TO THAT
WELL WERE MADE BY OASIS.
THERE WAS NO DECISIONS MADE THAT
REFLECTED A MENTALITY TOWARDS
SAFETY.
>> Reporter: WILLIAMS SAYS OASIS
HAD ULTIMATE CONTROL OVER THE
SITE THAT DAY.
LIKE MOST COMPANIES, OASIS
PETROLEUM TYPICALLY RECEIVES
REAL-TIME DATA ON WELL
CONDITIONS, PRESSURE, AND
PROGRESS.
IN FACT, THIS EMAIL SHOWS THAT
THE VERY WELL BRENDAN WAS
WORKING ON HAD BEEN RECOGNIZED
FOR SETTING A DRILLING SPEED
RECORD JUST MONTHS BEFORE.
BUT OSHGAVEA OASIS CURSORY
ATTENTION IN ITS ACCIDENT
INVESTIGATION-- THE ATTORNEY FOR
BRENDAN'S PARENTS SAYS THE
AGENCY LACKS A SOPHISTICATED
UNDERSTANDING OF THE OIL AND GAS
INDUSTRY-- ONE OF ITS SAFETY
REPORTS ON THE EXPLOSION
INCLUDED A QUOTED STRAIGHT FROM
WIKIPEDIA.
HOW COME OASIS WASN'T HELD
ACCOUNTABLE FOR THIS ACCIDENT?
>> OASIS DOESN'T HAVE EXPOSED
EMPLOYEES ON THE JOB SITE--
RATHER THEY HIRED A
SUBCONTRACTOR.
NOW THAT MIGHT SOUND LIKE A
NCHBU OF LEGALESE, BUT IT IS
VERY IMPORTANT.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, THAT MEANS
REGULATORS COULD NOT CITE THE
COMPANY.
A HANDWRITTEN NOTE FROM AN OSHA
INVESTIGATOR SHOWS THAT WHILE
BALTRUSCH SHUT DOWN THE WELL THE
DAY BEFORE THE EXPLOSION, THE
INVESTIGATOR STILL CONCLUDED "NO
OASIS EMPLOYEE ON SITE."
AS A RESULT, WHILE CARLSON WAS
FINED $63,000, OASIS PAID NO
PENALTY.
CARLSON, BALTRUSH AND OASIS ALL
DECLINED TO BE INTERVIEWED, BUT
OASIS SAID THE WELL WAS SAFE TO
WORK ON AND SENT US THIS
STATEMENT:
"OASIS PUTS WORKER AND
ENVIRONMENTAL SAFETY FIRST
ANY SUGGESTION THAT MR.
BALTRUSCH OR OASIS PETROLEUM
MIGHT HAVE KNOWINGLY PUT WORKERS
IN DANGER IS PATENTLY FALSE.
THE RELEASE OF GAS AND THE
SUBSEQUENT FIRE WAS CAUSED BY A
KICK, OR SUDDEN AND UNEXPECTED
FLOW OF GAS INTO THE WELLBORE.
THERE'S ANOTHER REASON TOP
ENERGY COMPANIES ARE NOT HELD
ACCOUNTABLE.
ATTORNEY PAUL SANDERSON SAYS OIL
FIELD CONTRACTS CAN SHIELD THE
COMPANIES EVEN WHEN THEY ARE
RESPONSIBLE FOR ACCIDENTS.
>> IF YOU'RE THE PERSON
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ACCIDENT
THAT CAUSED INJURY, YOU KNOW, AT
THE END OF THE DAY, YOU SHOULD
BE THE PERSON PAYING THOSE
COSTS.
>> Reporter: SANDERSON CRAFTED
AN ANTI-INDEMNIFICATION BILL
SIMILAR TO ONES THAT PASSED IN
OTHER OIL STATES LIKE TEXAS.
BUT SANDERSON SAYS HE WAS OUT-
GUNNED BY THE OIL LOBBY.
>> AND BY KILLING THIS BILL,
THEY CERTAINLY CREATED A SYSTEM
WHERE THEY ARE CONTINUED TO
ALLOW THEM TO SHIFT THE
RESPONSILITIBY FOR THEIR OWN
NEIGENGLCE ONTO OTHER PARTIES.
>> Reporter: SAFETY EXPERTS LIKE
DENNIS SCHMITZ SAY THAT ENERGY
COMPANIES ARE DRAWN TO NORTH
DAKOTA BECAUSE THEY CAN SIDESTEP
ACCOUNTABILITY.
>> LITERALLY, YOU GOT THE FOX IN
THE HEN HOUSE.
IT'S EASY TO SEE WHY EVERYBODY
WANTS TO COME TO NORTH DAKOTA
AND DO BUSINESS, BECAUSE THERE
IS NO RESTRICTIONS.
>> Reporter: AND THAT IS ONE
REASON THE BAKKEN IS SO
DANGEROUS.
SCHMITZ SAYST'S IOFTEN HARD FOR
CONTRACTORS TO INSIST ON SAFETY
IF THAT GETS IN THE WAY OF
PRODUCTION.
>> IF THEY ARE INCENTIVIZED IN
THE WRONG WAY, IT IS VERY
DIFFICULT TO TELL THE PERSON WHO
LITERALLY CARRIES THE BALANCE OF
WORK FOR YOUR ENTIRE COMPANY "NO
WE CAN'T DO THIS" OR "NO WE
CAN'T DO IT THAT WAY BECAUSE
T'S IUNSAFE."
>> Reporter: HEADING TO THE SITE
OF BRENDAN'S ACCIDENT, I COULD
SEE ANOTHER RIG DRILLING ON THE
VERY SAME SPOT.
THE NEW OIL WELL IS LESS THAN
100 FEET FROM THE ONE THAT BLEW
UP.
A SIMPLE WOOD CROSS COMMEMORATES
THE SPOT WHERE BRENDAN WAS
KILLED FOUR YEARS AGO.
HIS PARENTS REACHED A SETTLEMENT
WITH OASIS FOR AN UNDISCLOSED
AMOUNT.
BUT THE INDEMNIFICATION HELPED
THE OIL GIANT PASS ON PART OF
THESE COSTS TO THEIR
CONTRACTOR'S INSURANCE COMPANY.
BRENDAN'S FATHER SAYS THERE'S NO
REAL INCENTIVE FOR OIL COMPANIES
TO KEEP WORKERS SAFE.
>> TO THEM, THERE'S JUST DOLLAR
SIGNS COMING OUT OF THE GROUND.
I DON'T THINK THEY HAVE ANY
REGARDS TO HOW THEY'RE GETTING
IT, AND I THINK THEY SHOULD BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE WELL BEING
OF THE PEOPLE WORKING ON THEIR
SITE.
>> Rorteepr: AND NOW THAT THE
PRICE OF CRUDE HAS COLLAPSED,
MANY IN THE BAKKEN FEAR THAT THE
PRESSURE TO PUT SPEED BEFORE
SAFETY WILL ONLY INCREASE.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M
JENNIFER GOLLAN WITH REVEAL IN
WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA.
>> Ifill: OUR STORY WAS PRODUCED
BY "REVEAL" FROM THE CENTER FOR
INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING.
YOU CAN SUBSCRIBE TO THEIR
PODCAST ON ITUNES.
AND HEAR THEIR MONTHLY SHOW ON
PUBLIC RADIO STATIONS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
FIND A LINK ON OUR WEBSITE.
>> Wooduff: NOW TO THE OFTEN
TENSE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE
WORLD'S TWO LARGEST ECONOMIES.
THIS WEEK IN WASHINGTON, HIGH
LEVEL DELEGATIONS FROM CHINA AND
THE U.S. MET FOR THEIR ANNUAL
TALKS KNOWN AS THE STRATEGY AND
ECONOMIC DIALOGUE, AIMED AT
MAINTAINING WORKING RELATIONS
BETWEEN THE TWO NATIONS.
THOSE EFFORTS WERE STRAINED,
HOWEVER, BY TENSIONS OVER
SECURITY MATTERS-- INCLUDING
CHINESE GOVERNMENT SPONSORED
CYBER ATTACKS AND THEFT-- AND
THAT COUNTRY'S AMBITIONS IN THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA.
PRESIDENT OBAMA RAISED CONCERNS
ON THOSE FRONTS WITH CHINESE
OFFICIALS AT THE WHITE HOUSE
THIS AFTERNOON.
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS WHAT
HAPPENED IS EVAN OSNOS, AUTHOR
OF THE BOOK, "AGE OF AMBITION:
CHASING FORTUNE, TRUTH AND FAITH
IN THE NEW CHINA."
HE'S ALSO A WRITER FOR "THE NEW
YORKER" MAGAZINE.
EVAN OSNOS, WELCOME BACK TO THE
PROGRAM.
HOW WOULD YOU DESCRIBE U.S.
CHINA RELATIONS GOING INTO THIS
CONVERSATION.
WHAT WERE EXPECTATIONS.
>> THIS HAS BEEN A ROCKY PERIOD
LATELY.
THE REALITY IS THAT WE'RE LIVING
THROUGH A HISTORIC CHANGE IN THE
WORLD.
CHINA IS NOW RISING, IT'S
PLAYING A GREATER ROLE IN GLOBAL
INSTITUTIONS WHETHER IT'S THE
IMF OR THE WORLD BANK.
AND IT IS ALSO MAKING ITS
PRESENCE KNOWN IN THE PACIFIC IN
EAST ASIA.
THEY'RE SAYING LOOK WE WANT TO
PLAY A LARGER ROLE IN
CONTROLLING SECURITY IN THE EAST
CHINA SEA AND THE SOUTH CHINA
SEA.
AND OF COURSE THE ISSUES AROUND
CYBER ESPIONAGE AND CYBER THEFT,
THE UNITED STATES RECENTLY
SUSPECTED BUT IS NOT FORMALLY
BLAMED CHINA FOR AN ENORMOUS
BREACH OF THE OFFICE OF
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT.
AND ALL OF THESE ISSUES ARE
RIGHT ON THE TABLE AS WE TRY TO
FIGURE OUT HOW ARE THESE TWO
COUNTRIES GOING TO TALK TO EACH
OTHER.
>> Woodruff: DOES THE U.S. GO
IN WITH EXPECTATIONS.
WHAT WERE THEY.
>> THE EXPECTATIONS ARE WE NEED
TO CONTINUE TO BUILD THIS
RELATIONSHIP IN A BASIC WAY.
SOME OF THAWCH TIMES YO OFTEN TO
THESE MEETINGS AND SAY IT'S
GOING TO BE A TALK SHOW.
THAT'S THE ARCHITECTURE FOR THE
RELATIONSHIPS IN THE MOMENTS YOU
HAVE A CRISES.
THOUGH ARE THE PEOPLE WHO SAY
WHO IS GOING TO BE ON THE OTHER
END OF THE LINE WHEN I CALL.
THEY DIDN'T GO INTO THIS SAYING
WE'RE GOING TO COME OUT OF THESE
MEETINGS WITH IMPORTANT
DELIVERABLES.
WE'RE NOT TRYING TO SAY WE'RE
GOING TO HOLD THE CHINESE FEET
TO THE FIRE ON THIS MEETING AND
GET THEM TO SAY WE'LL PULL BACK
ON OUR CYBER ESPIONAGE.
WHAT WE WANT THEM TO DO AND I
THINK THIS WAS A BABY STEP IN
THE RIGHT DIRECTION GET THE
CHINESE TO ACKNOWLEDGE LOOK WE
HAVE AN ISSUE WHO ARE.
TWO HUGE COUNTRIES WITH LARGE
GROWING MILITARIES ARE TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT THEY CAN DO
USING CYBER TECHNOLOGY TO EXPAND
THEREFORE UNDERSTANDING OF EACH
OTHER.
BUT IF WE DON'T TALK BIT, THEN
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT THE OTHER'S
INTENTIONS ARE AND ULTIMATELY
WHAT THEY ARE WILLING TO DO.
>> Woodruff: SO EVEN THAT
YOU'RE SAYING THE U.S. CONSIDERS
SOME PROGRESS.
>> I THINK THEY DO.
GOING INTO THIS, PART OF THE
GOAL WAS TO SET THE TABLE FOR AN
IMPORTANT VISIT THIS FALL.
THE CHINESE PRESIDENT IS COMING
FOR A STATE VISIT IN SEPTEMBER.
IN ORDER FOR THAT TO BE
PRODUCTIVE, THEY HAVE TO KNOW
WHAT ARE THE ISSUES WE WANT TO
TRY TO GET ACCOMPLISHED.
ONE OF THE THING THAT THE U.S.
IS GOING TO TRY TO DO THIS FALL
IS TO TRY TO GET CHINA TO COME
TOGETHER WITH US ON ONE OF THE
BIG ISSUES IN THE WORLD.
WHETHER IT'S CYBER ESPIONAGE OR
TENSIONS OVER TERRITORY IN THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA AND THE EAST
CHINA SEA.
YOU REMEMBER LAST FALL WE HAD AN
AGREEMENT ON CLIMATE CHANGE.
THIS WAS POSITIVE.
SO NOW THE QUESTION IS WHAT'S
NEXT.
>> Woodruff: SO WHERE DO THEY
GO FROM HERE.
AFTER A MEETING LIKE THIS, DOES
THIS MEAN WE'RE NOW ABLE TO
TALK, TO HAVE REGULAR
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT WHAT'S GOING
ON IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA WHICH
HAS CHINA'S NEIGHBORS VERY
RATTLED.
>> I THINK THIS SETS THE RULES
OF ENGAGEMENT FOR WHAT ARE THE
NEGOTIATIONS IN ADVANCE OF THIS
IMPORTANT SUMMIT IN THE FALL.
BUT IF YOU TAKE FOR EXAMPLE
CYBER ESPIONAGE, THIS IS A CASE
WHERE NEITHER COUNTRY BELIEVES
THAT THE OTHER IS GOING TO PULL
BACK FUNDAMENTALLY FROM TRYING
TO USE TECHNOLOGY TO UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE OTHER IS DOING.
WHAT THE UNITED STATES WANTS
CHINA TO DO IS TO SAY LOOK WE
RECOGNIZE THERE'S A DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN LEGITIMATE ESPIONAGE AND
THE CYBER THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY.
THIS HAS BEEN A PERSISTENT
CONCERN FOR THE UNITED STATES,
THAT MAJOR AMERICAN COMPANIES
SAY WE'RE BEING, WE'RE
CONSTANTLY BEING ATTACKED FROM
CHINA.
CHINA SO FAR HAS NOT
ACKNOWLEDGED THAT THIS IS A
SIGNIFICANT CONCERN.
THE UNITED STATES SAYS LOOK YOU
HAVE TO REALIZE THIS IS
BEGINNING TO AFFECT THE OVERALL
HEALTH OF A RELATIONSHIP THAT
NEITHER ONE OF US CAN AFFORD.
>> Woodruff: JUST QUICKLY.
SOME AREA OF AGREEMENT ON
ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND ON THE
ENVIRONMENT.
>> THEY DID.
THEY CAME OUT OF THIS MEETING
TODAY SAYING WE'RE GOING TO WORK
TOGETHER TO HELP PROTECT THE
ENVIRONMENT SAME THING WE'VE
DONE ON CLIMATE CHANGE.
WE'LL PRY TO PROMOTE INVESTMENT
IN EACH OTHER'S COUNTRY BUT WE
HAVE TO BEGIN THE HARD WORK
DEALING WITH CYBER AND DEALING
WITH MAYOR TIME ISSUES I MARITIE
PACIFIC.
THANK YOU FOR TALKING WITH US.
>> AN MY PLEASURE.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT,
AN ARTIST EXAMINING PIECES OF
HISTORY-- HER OWN AND HER NATIVE
LAND OF IRAN.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: FACES FROM IRAN.
STILL IMAGES.
AND FILMS.
WORK OF AN ARTIST LOOKING AFAR
TO THE DRAMAS AND PROMISE OF HER
NATIVE LAND.
>> I WOULD SAY I MAKE FICTIONS.
>.>> Reporter: YOU MAKE
FICTION.
BUT OUT OF REALITY.
>> I THINK THE CREATIVE
IMAGINATION ART IS IN ESSENCE
SOMETHING THAT TAKES REALITY AND
YET TRANSFORMS IT INTO SOMETHING
THAT IS FICTIONAL.
>> Reporter: SHIRIN NESHAT
GREW UP IN PRE REVOLUTIONARY
IRAN.
SHE CAME TO THE U.S. IN THE
1970'S AS A STUDENT AND BECAME
AN INTERNATIONALLY RECOGNIZED
ARTIST WITH EXHIBITIONS AROUND
THE WORLD.
HER LATEST AT WASHINGTON'S
MUSEUM IS TITLED FACING HISTORY.
DO YOU SEE YOURSELF THAT WAY AS
AN ARTIST, WORKING WITH HISTORY.
>> IT'S A CONSCIOUS LEVEL, YES.
WHEN I WENT BACK TO IRAN AFTER
THE REVOLUTION AND I HAD BEEN
ABSENT FOR 11 YEARS.
WHEN I ARRIVED IN IRAN IN 1990,
I WAS QUITE BLOWN AWAY BY THE
TRANSFORMATION OF THE COUNTRY.
AND I HAD ALSO AN INCREDIBLE
URGE TO RECONNECT TO IRAN.
SO HEART IN A WAY BECAME AN
EXCUSE TO RECONNECT TO MY HOME,
MY FAMILY AND THE COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: THE EXHIBITION
BEGINS IN THE PERIOD OF THE U.S.
MET OVERTHROW OF THE GOVERNMENT
IN 1953.
BUT THIS IS HISTORY THROUGH
POETIC IMAGERY.
AS IN NESHAT'S FILM.
A WOMAN FALLS TO HER DEATH AND
HAS A MAGICAL CONVERSATION WITH
A SHINED PROTESTER IN WHICH SHE
PONDERS HER OWN ROLE IN SOCIETY.
NESHAT SERIES WOMEN OF ALLAH
EXPLORES THE IMPACT AND THE
MUSLIM WOMEN OF BEING VICTIMIZED
AND SUBMISSIVE.
THESE ARE STAGED PHOTOGRAPHERS
CREATED IN HER NEW YORK STUDIO.
>> THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN VERY
OPPRESSIVE BUT THIS IS WHAT THE
IMAGE IS THE WOMEN ARE EXTREMELY
REBELLIOUS, THEY'RE VERY VOCAL,
VERY CONFRONTATIONAL AND BY NO
MEANS SUBMISSIVE.
>> Reporter: NESHAT HERSELF
APPEARS IN MUCH OF HER WORK
EMBODYING THE CHARACTER SHE
SEEKS TO PORTRAY.
OF HER IMAGES, SHE ADDS
INTRICATE CALLIGRAPHY.
>> I HANDWRITE THE CALLIGRAPHY
ON THE PHOTO.
IT'S A LABOR OF THE ARTIST, I'M
VERY INTERESTED IN LITERATURE,
IRANIAN CONTEMPORARY MODERN
LITERATURE.
THEY'RE NOT IN THE TEXT.
THEY ARE MY FAVORITE POEMS.
>> Reporter: GIVE ME AN
EXAMPLE.
HERE'S ONE OF AN EYE THAT HAS
THE WRITING RIGHT IN THE EYE.
>> YES.
THIS IMAGE IS ACTUALLY CREATED
ONE OF THE FIRST IMAGES THAT I
PRODUCED.
IT WAS IN 1993 IS CALLED OFFERED
EYE.
AND IT INCONSPIRED ME TO SHOOT
THIS PHOTOGRAPH.
THE POEM IS CALLED I FEEL SORRY
FOR THE GARDEN.
OBVIOUSLY THE GARDEN BEING A
METAPHOR FOR A WOMAN.
>> Reporter: MORE RECENT BODY
OF WORK IS A RESPONSE TO THE
2009 GREEN MOVEMENT THAT WAS
VIOLENTLY PUT DOWN BY THE
IRANIAN REGIME.
IT'S CALLED THE BOOK OF KINGS.
IN REFERENCE TO AN ANCIENT EPIC
POEM ABOUT THE PERSIAN EMPIRE.
THE SERIES AINGA USING MODELS IS
DIVIDED INTO THREE PARTS.
THE MASSES, THE PATRIOTS AND THE
VILLAINS.
>> THIS BODY OF WORK IS MORE
ABOUT THE QUESTION OF PEOPLE
VERSUS TIN TIERNEY.
PEOPLE WHO DESIRE AND BELIEVE IN
WHATEVER IT IS IS INTERSECTED
WITH VIOLENCE AND ATROCITIES.
>> Reporter: THEY'RE
BEAUTIFUL IMAGES.
DO YOU FEEL THAT TENSION OR
BEAUTY AND VIOLENCE.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK THAT NOTION OF
CONTRADICTION MAYOR DOCK
OPPOSITE IS AT THE CORE OF MY
WORK.
I FEEL AS A WOMAN COMPLETELY
CONFLICTED BY WHO I AM IN
NATURE.
SOMEONE IS STRONG BUT ALSO MY
IDENTITY AS A MUSLIM, AS A
PERSON, AS A WERNER WESTERN WER.
IT IS MY EXPRESS THAT I FEEL IS
THE CORE OF WHO I AM.
>>or
FACING HISTORY IS ON EXHIBITION
THROUGH SEPTEMBER 20TH.
FROM THE HERSHORN MUSEUM IN
WASHINGTON D.C., I'M JEFFREY
BROWN FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: AND A NEWS UPDATE
>> POLITICIANS GET USED TO IT
WHEN THEY CUT BACK ON THE
CAMPAIGN TRAIL.
BUT TODAY A HECKLER MADE IT
INSIDE THE WHITEHOUSE GATHER FOR
A GAY PRIDE MONTH RECEPTION.
THE GUEST WAS PROTESTING THE
DEPORTATION OF GAY, LESBIAN AND
TRANSGENDER IMMIGRANTS AND THE
PRESIDENT SHOT BACK.
>> LISTEN, YOU'RE IN MY HOUSE.
[LAUGHTER]
[APPLAUSE]
COME ON.
DO YOU KNOW WHAT, IT'S NOT
RESPECTFUL.
>> Wooduff: THE PRESIDENT DID
CALL FOR MORE EFFORTS TO
OVERCOME DISCRIMINATION AGAINST
TRANSGENDER AMERICANS.
>> Wooduff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.